Structural episode (#55)
4TUResearchData-Carpentries/interoperability-climate-sciences: episodes/structural-interoperability.md

## Structural interoperability is a contract, not a file extension

A file extension such as `.csv`, `.nc`, `.tif`, or `.zarr` is only a label. Structural interoperability depends on several related layers working together.

| Layer | Question answered | Example |
|---|---|---|
| **Data model** | What kinds of objects exist, and how are they related? | Rows, columns, and cells; or dimensions, arrays, coordinates, and attributes |
| **Encoding or format** | How is that model represented as text or bytes? | Comma-delimited text, NetCDF binary encoding, Parquet column chunks |
| **Schema** | Which fields or variables are expected, with which types and constraints? | `station_id` is a required string; `temperature` is a number |
| **Convention or profile** | How should a community use the model and metadata consistently? | CF Conventions for NetCDF; CSVW metadata; Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF |
| **Access method** | How are the bytes or logical data objects retrieved? | Local file access, HTTP, OPeNDAP, object storage, HTTP range requests |

These layers should not be treated as synonyms.

* **NetCDF** defines a data model and one or more encodings.

> * **CF Conventions** add rules for describing scientific variables, coordinates, units, and grid mappings within that model (see [this episode](semantic-interoperability.md))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **CF Conventions** add rules for describing scientific variables, coordinates, units, and grid mappings within that model (see [Semantic interoperability episode](semantic-interoperability.md))
```

> * **OPeNDAP** is an access protocol that exposes remotely stored data for subsetting and retrieval.(see [this episode](protocols.md))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **OPeNDAP** is an access protocol that exposes remotely stored data for subsetting and retrieval.(see [Technical interoperability: Data access protocols episode](protocols.md))
```
